README.md, before:

# ExplainShell for Chrome

A chrome extension which automates looking up shell commands on [http://explainshell.com/](http://explainshell.com). 

## Authors

This project is being developed by Jake Zimmerman, Justin Gallagher, Ted Li, and Howard Chen as a part of the final project for 15-221 Technical Communications for Computer Scientists.

## Directory Structure

Right now the directory structure is very basic. 

- The `handout/` directory contains documents describing the requirements for various phases (mirrored here for the sake of convenience). PDFs are preferred to MS Office files.
- The `docs/` directory contains planning documents, written assignments, and presentation slides.

More directories will be added as there becomes more solid content to be managed.

## explainshell.com

explainshell.com is a project by [idank](/idank) that parses shell commands, finds the revelant pieces of documentation for the commands, flags, and syntax, and displays them to the user. This chrome extension allows you to click on commands from within chrome and jump to their documentation on explainshell.com for a seamless workflow. If you haven't already, you should check out [his project](/idank/explainshell) on GitHub as well!

## License

MIT License. See LICENSE.

Commit message:

Added Chrome extension
Completes the first phase of development.

Features:
  - Select a command and right click, then click on "Lookup on
    explainshell.com" to jump to a new tab
  - Rudimentary icon
  - Put relevant documentation in the README

README.md, after:

# ExplainShell for Chrome

A chrome extension which automates looking up shell commands on [http://explainshell.com/](http://explainshell.com). 

## Authors

This project is being developed by Jake Zimmerman, Justin Gallagher, Ted Li, and Howard Chen as a part of the final project for 15-221 Technical Communications for Computer Scientists.

## Directory Structure

- The `lib/` directory contains the actual chrome extension.
- The `ref/` directory contains some sample code relevant to creating our extension, convientenly downloaded so we don't have to keep redownloading it.
- The `handout/` directory contains documents describing the requirements for various phases (mirrored here for the sake of convenience). PDFs are preferred to MS Office files.
- The `docs/` directory contains planning documents, written assignments, and presentation slides.

## Chrome Extension APIs Reference

To create the actual Chrome extension, we're using the `contextMenus` API and the `tabs` API. The following links have been helpful:

- [contextMenus reference](https://developer.chrome.com/extensions/contextMenus)
- [contextMenus sample](https://developer.chrome.com/extensions/samples#search:contextmenus)
- [tabs reference](https://developer.chrome.com/extensions/tabs)

## explainshell.com

explainshell.com is a project by [idank](/idank) that parses shell commands, finds the revelant pieces of documentation for the commands, flags, and syntax, and displays them to the user. This chrome extension allows you to click on commands from within chrome and jump to their documentation on explainshell.com for a seamless workflow. If you haven't already, you should check out [his project](/idank/explainshell) on GitHub as well!

## License

MIT License. See LICENSE.
